.TH tcpserver 1
.SH NAME
tcpserver \- accept incoming TCP connections
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tcpserver
[
.B \-146jpPhHrRoOdDqQv
]
[
.B \-c\fIlimit
]
[
.B \-X\-x\fIrules.cdb
]
[
.B \-B\fIbanner
]
[
.B \-g\fIgid
]
[
.B \-u\fIuid
]
[
.B \-b\fIbacklog
]
[
.B \-l\fIlocalname
]
[
.B \-t\fItimeout
]
[
.B \-I\fIifname
]
.I host
.I port
.I program
[
.I arg ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tcpserver
waits for connections from TCP clients.
For each connection, it runs
.I program
with the given arguments,
with descriptor 0 reading from the network
and descriptor 1 writing to the network.

.SH BINDINGS
.B tcpserver
will attach to the primary IP address of
.I host
while the host name is fed through qualification using
.IR dns_ip6_qualify .
If
.I host
is given as dotted decimal IPv4 or compactified IPv6
address,
.B tcpserver
will bind uniquely to those.  In order to bind
.B tcpserver
to a LLU IPv6 address (ie. fe80::a:b:c) additionally the interface name
.B \-I\fIifname
has to be provided.

\fINote\fR: The kernel might use temporary changing SLAAC addresses.

.B tcpserver
can be instructed to be multi-homing capable while binding
to all available IP addresses. Now
.I host
is given as 
.I 0.0.0.0  
or 
.IR :: .
.B tcpserver 
additionally supports legacy binding to 
.I host 
as
.I 0
which is identical to
.IR 0.0.0.0 .

Further,
.B tcpserver
may be forced to provide dual-stack capabilities, thus allowing
IPv4 and IPv6 clients to attach to the same instance once
.I host
equals 
.I :0 
as pseudo IP address.

.I port
may be a numeric port number
or a port name.  If
.I port
is 0,
.B tcpserver
will choose a free port.

.B tcpserver
sets up several environment variables,
as described in
.B tcp-environ(5).

.B tcpserver
exits when it receives SIGTERM.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.B \-1
After preparing to receive connections,
print the local ip address and port number to standard output.
.TP
.B \-4
Use IPv4 sockets.  
.TP
.B \-6
Force IPv6 mode. This will set \fIPROTO\fR to \fBTCP6\fR and put
IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses in \fITCPLOCALIP\fR and \fITCPREMOTEIP\fR.
.TP
.B \-c\fIlimit
Do not handle more than
.I limit
simultaneous connections.
If there are
.I limit
simultaneous copies of
.I program
running, defer acceptance of a new connection
until one copy finishes.
.I limit
must be a positive integer.
Default: 40.
.TP
.B \-x\fIrules.cdb
Follow the rules compiled into
.I rules.cdb
by
.BR tcprules .
These rules may specify setting environment variables
or rejecting connections from bad sources.

.B tcpserver
does not read
.I rules.cdb
into memory;
you can rerun
.B tcprules
to change
.BR tcpserver 's
behavior on the fly.
.TP 
.B \-X
continue processing, even if 
.I rules.cdb
is not readable.
.TP
.B \-B\fIbanner
Write
.I banner
to the network immediately after each connection is made.
.B tcpserver
writes
.I banner
before looking up
.IR TCPREMOTEHOST ,
before looking up
.IR TCPREMOTEINFO ,
and before checking
.IR rules.cdb .

This feature can be used to reduce latency in protocols
where the client waits for a greeting from the server.
.TP
.B \-g\fIgid
Switch group ID to
.I gid
after preparing to receive connections.
.I gid
must be a positive integer.
.TP
.B \-u\fIuid
Switch user ID to 
.I uid
after preparing to receive connections.
.I uid
must be a positive integer.
.TP
.B \-I\fIifname
Bind to the network interface
.I ifname
("eth0" on Linux, for example).  This is only defined and needed for
IPv6 link-local addresses.
.TP
.B \-b\fIbacklog
Allow up to
.I backlog
simultaneous SYN_RECEIVEDs.
Default: 20.
On some systems,
.I backlog
is silently limited to 5.
See
.BR listen (2)
for more details.
.TP
.B \-o
Leave IP options alone.
If the client is sending packets along an IP source route,
send packets back along the same route.
.TP
.B \-O
(Default.)
Kill IP options.
A client can still use IPv4/IPv6 source routing to connect and to send data,
but packets will be sent back along the default route.
.TP
.B \-d
(Default.)
Delay sending data for a fraction of a second whenever the
remote host is responding slowly,
to make better use of the network.
.TP
.B \-D
Never delay sending data;
enable TCP_NODELAY.
This is appropriate for interactive connections.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet.
Do not print any messages.
.TP
.B \-Q
(Default.)
Print error messages.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose.
Print all available messages. 
.SH "DATA-GATHERING OPTIONS"
.TP
.B \-p
Paranoid.
After looking up the remote host name,
look up the IP addresses for that name,
and make sure one of them matches
.IR TCPREMOTEIP .
If none of them do,
unset
.IR TCPREMOTEHOST .
.TP
.B \-P
(Default.)
Not paranoid.
.TP
.B \-h
(Default.)
Look up the remote host name and set
.IR TCPREMOTEHOST .
.TP
.B \-H
Do not look up the remote host name.
.TP
.B \-l\fIlocalname
Do not look up the local host name;
use
.I localname
for
.IR TCPLOCALHOST .
.TP
.B \-r
Attempt to obtain
.I TCPREMOTEINFO
from the remote host.
.TP
.B \-R
(Default.)
Do not attempt to obtain
.I TCPREMOTEINFO
from the remote host.
.TP
.B \-t\fItimeout
Give up on the 
.I TCPREMOTEINFO
connection attempt
after
.I timeout
seconds. Default: 26.
.SH "LOOPBACK ADDRESSES"
IPv4 and IPv6 have a significant different
understanding of loopback addresses:
.IP
127./8
.P
.IP
::1/128
.P
this is the host-scoped loopback-address, while
.P
.IP
fe80::1%lo0
.P
is the link-scoped looback-address and
.I lo0
is the name of the loopback interface.
.SH "DNS RESOLVER SETTINGS"
Use \fI$DNSCACHEIP\fR to set the DNS resolver's IP(s) dynamically
irrespectively from the settings in
.IR /etc/resolv.conf .
The individual IPs are separated by blanks; IPv6 LLU
addresses may be appended with the interface name following a '%' sign.
If the environment variable \fI$LOCALDOMAIN\fR is populated,
this name will be appended to unqualified host names.
Additional rewriting of local to public names is facilitated
in case the file
.I /etc/dnsrewritefile
exists and is populated, or alternatively, the environment
variable \fI$DNSREWRITEFILE\fR points to a different file.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES SET"
.B tcpserver
provides the following environment variables:

.I PROTO
this is either TCP or TCP6.

The interface name for IPv6 connections:
.IR TCP6INTERFACE .

The local information:
.IR TCPLOCALIP ,
.IR TCP6LOCLAIP ,
.IR TCPLOCALPORT ,
.IR TCP6LOCALPORT,
.IR TCPLOCALHOST,
.IR TCP6LOCALHOST .

The IP address of connection:
.I TCPREMOTEIP 
and
.IR TCP6REMOTEIP .

The remote port number:
.IR TCPREMOTEPORT ,
.IR TCP6REMOTEPORT .

The hostname (FQDN) of the peer, if available:
.IR TCPREMOTEHOST ,
.IR TCP6REMOTEHOST .

In case of a successfull IDENT lookup:
.IR TCPREMOTEINFO .
.SH LOGGING
Invoking
.B tcpserver
with the option
.I -v
will provide a logging of the session including 
local and remote IP addresses and port. 
In case the option
.I -h
is given, the remote hostname is displayed, if available.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
argv0(1),
fixcr(1),
recordio(1),
tcpclient(1),
tcprules(1),
listen(2),
tcp-environ(5)
